5 through 11 this morning as we continue with our study
through the book of 2 Corinthians.
Our theme of course, God's grace is sufficient.
Our theme for 2025 and looking here at preaching
through the book of 2 Corinthians.
It'll be in chapter two this morning.
The subject of forgiveness is addressed
throughout the Bible.
First we discover the glorious truth
and it is a glorious truth that our God
is a God who is ready to forgive.
Our God is a God who is ready to pardon.
Our God, the Bible says that with him there is forgiveness.
And the reality is that that is a wonderful,
glorious truth of the Bible.
And this morning when we understand that God
has revealed that truth to us as his creation
because he wants us to know that he is a God who forgives.
Now we understand the balance and the character
and nature of God that he forgives but he also judges.
And we understand that forgiveness is made available
but if you reject God's forgiveness
then you stand in judgment.
And that is the truth.
See God judged Jesus Christ on the cross of Calvary
when he made him to be sin for us who knew no sin
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him
and the wrath of God will not be poured upon me
for Jesus took my place and if you're saved here
this morning he took your place and I'm so glad
that I can stand here this morning as a recipient
of God's forgiveness and I can stand with assurance
and with confidence and say I have been forgiven.
No, I wasn't forgiven because I deserve forgiveness
and you're not forgiven because you deserve forgiveness
but we have been forgiven this morning
because our God is a God who is ready to forgive
and ready to pardon.
I'm reminded of the wonderful truth
and we think about forgiveness in the context
of a believer in coming to Christ
and accepting the Lord Jesus Christ as our personal savior
and being forgiven of our sin and being given
the gift of eternal life but you know as believers
the reality is that at the moment of salvation
our sin nature is not eradicated.
The old man is not just kind of no longer,
no, the Bible says that we're to put on the new,
we're to put off the old and we understand this put off
and put on principle that God teaches us in his word
and the reality is that as believers you sin.
You say oh not me, well you better get in the Bible amen
because if you say not me then the Bible says this of you
that you're a liar and you've made God a liar
and his truth is not in you
and that's a pretty serious indictment.
1 John's pretty clear that if we say that we have no sin
that we've deceived ourselves and his truth is not in us
and we make God a liar.
So the reality is that even as saved people we sin
but here's the wonderful truth.
The Bible says if we confess our sin
he is faithful and just to what?
To forgive us and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
The Bible goes on in 1 John chapter number two
to tell us that we have an advocate with the father,
Jesus Christ the righteous.
Literally he is in that capacity of being our advocate.
He is our defense attorney
and never does he argue for your innocence, why?
Because we're guilty, he simply says I paid for it
and that's a wonderful truth of God's word.
This morning we think about the subject of forgiveness
and we're reminded immediately as we think about
the subject that first we discover
that our God is a God of forgiveness.
Then as we study the scriptures we discover
that as God's people, as the recipients of God's forgiveness
that we too have been instructed to forgive.
We've been given the instruction to forgive.
We'll look at some passages this morning in Matthew
and in Luke but let me just read for you
one verse of scripture before we dive in here
to 2 Corinthians two and it's a familiar verse,
Ephesians four and verse number 32
where the Bible says this and be kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another,
notice even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you.
God has given to us as the people
that have been the recipients of his grace and his mercy
that we have been forgiven,
that we are to be a people that forgive.
And this is so important as we come to this passage
in 2 Corinthians chapter number two,
the title of the message is simply that, forgiveness.
And we come to 2 Corinthians chapter number two
in verses five through 11, notice what the Bible says.
But if any have caused grief, he hath not grieved me
but in part that I may not overcharge you all.
Sufficient to such a man is this punishment
which was inflicted of many.
So that contrary wise he ought rather to forgive him
and comfort him lest perhaps such in one
should be swallowed up with over much sorrow.
Wherefore, I beseech you
that you would confirm your love toward him.
For to this end also did I write
that I might know the proof of you
whether you be obedient in all things.
To whom you forgive anything, I forgive also.
For if I forgave anything to whom I forgave it
for your sakes forgave I it in the person of Christ.
And then notice this verse,
lest Satan should get an advantage of us
for we are not ignorant of his devices.
Obviously, as we begin our study of 2 Corinthians,
we understand there's much history
between the Apostle Paul and the church at Corinth.
It was God that used the Apostle Paul to go to Corinth
to see a church established
and God used Paul in a great way.
Paul writes to the church in Corinth
and we have the letter of 1 Corinthians
and we find that in that letter,
the Apostle Paul deals with many things
that are taking place within the church.
We find that he begins to deal with the divisions
and the carnality and all that's present
in the church at Corinth.
He then begins to address problems
in the church in Corinth
and we'll reference one said problem
that's in 1 Corinthians 5 this morning
in this text of scripture in 2 Corinthians 2.
And then Paul goes on as you continue to read
through the book of 1 Corinthians
and he kind of makes this transition
and you can read it this way in chapter number seven
in verse number one.
He says, now concerning the things
whereof you wrote unto me.
And so the Apostle Paul gives them truth.
Of course, it's all under the inspiration
of the Holy Spirit of God,
but he's dealing with what's going on at Corinth.
He's addressing the matters,
but then evidently the church in Corinth,
some part of the church at Corinth
had sent Paul a letter
and had inquired about certain things.
So beginning in chapter number seven,
Paul begins to give answers to the questions
that were asked of him by the church in Corinth
in order to provide them with counsel,
with direction, with truth.
And because this was a church that was carnal.
This was a church that was divided.
This was a church that had all kinds of problems
and we find that God is instructing them.
As we mentioned a couple of weeks ago,
and really if we take the whole
of what we've studied thus far in 2 Corinthians,
we had an introductory message from the 12th chapter
that God's grace is sufficient,
but then we got right into the fact
that where there are sorrows, there is God's comfort.
And what a blessing to know that though we deal
with hardships and difficulties in life,
that our God is the God of all comfort
and that he comes and he brings to us exactly what we need
and he comforts us, yes, through his spirit
and yes, through his word,
but we also understand that he'll provide comfort to us
through one another as believers,
as brothers and sisters in Christ
and what a blessing that is.
A couple of weeks ago, we attempted to look at the passage
and deal with the subject of when you are misunderstood
because Paul was misunderstood by these believers in Corinth.
See, Paul didn't come like he said he was gonna come
and there was good reason for him not coming,
but because he did not come, Paul was judged.
Paul was criticized.
Paul was spoken evil of.
Paul was kind of painted in this view.
He says one thing, but he does something else.
He says yes, but he really means no.
He says no, but he really means yes
and it was a real mess.
And so Paul begins to provide for us
a beautiful passage of scripture
that helps us to understand when you are misunderstood
and when I am misunderstood, how do we approach that?
How do we deal with that?
And I said this, we must first examine ourselves.
Before we ever try to begin to explain ourselves,
we better examine ourselves
and Paul was able to stand before the Lord
with a pure conscience and be able to say,
I've examined myself and I've not done anything wrong here
and then provide explanation.
We now come into this text of scripture
and Paul once again is going to begin
addressing a matter that had been previously addressed
in the first book.
I gave you all of that background information
so that it all makes sense this morning
when we take these few verses of scripture
and study them, we want to make sure
that we're getting the truth within the greater context
of what's going on at Corinth.
So begin to look at this passage
and I want you, if you're taking notes,
to note number one, the conflict in Corinth.
And by the way, Corinth was a place
where conflict was regular
and this was nothing new for there to be conflict
in Corinth, but we find specifically
with regard to what we're.
looking at here in verses 5 and 6 of our text of Scripture, that there was some conflict
in Corinth over this matter that had been previously addressed. Notice Paul says in
verse number 5, but if any hath caused grief, he hath not grieved me, but in part. In other
words, Paul says, yes, there was some level of offense to me, but it was to the whole
body, to the whole church. And what Paul's dealing with, and he's referring back to that
matter in 1 Corinthians chapter number 5, this wickedness, this sin was going to have
an effect on the whole body, not just on Paul as an individual, but on the whole body. He
says that I may not overcharge you all. Sufficient to such a man is this punishment which was
inflicted of many. So Paul begins to address not only the sin or the offense, but he deals
with the punishment, and this is where the conflict in Corinth enters in. And by the
way, if you live any number of days on earth, you find that conflict at times cannot be
avoided. In fact, Paul says it this way to the church, to the believers in Rome, as much
as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men. Have you ever been in a situation where you
said, man, everything within me I've tried to live at peace, and I just don't know what's
going on here? There's conflict. And so how do we deal with it? Well, there's conflict
here, and Paul addressed back again in 1 Corinthians chapter 5, the wicked behavior of that man.
And that man was in gross, immoral sin, and we find that Paul addresses it. In fact, Paul
says it this way, I'm not there, and I've judged already. And that's all those people
who say judge not, go read that and just kind of consider that for a few moments.
Because the reality is that Paul says, I've already judged. And he lays out what the punishment
should be for this offender. By the way, the Lord Jesus Christ is the one in the Gospel
of Matthew that provided for the disciples that would be the early church leaders the
pattern for church discipline. And so God is, listen, the reality is that as individual
believers, we understand that whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth. Right? God is not,
he forgives, but he doesn't turn a blind eye to your sin. Amen? He forgives if we confess
our sin. Listen, this morning we must understand that here as Paul is dealing with this, yes,
as individual believers, we deal with the chastening of God, but as a church, there's
a responsibility for church discipline if needed. And it was needed in Corinth. It was
needed in Corinth. And so Paul says, as he writes in 1 Corinthians chapter 5, he addressed
the wicked behavior, but then he provides the church with counsel in addressing the
matter. It appears that as we read 2 Corinthians chapter number 2, that the church at Corinth
had accepted and followed the counsel. The Bible says in verse number 6, sufficient to
such a man as the punishment, this punishment, which was inflicted of many. And so Paul,
as we begin reading here, it appears that they had gone through and they gave the punishment
as it had been prescribed. It appears as you read through the passage of Scripture, and
we understand the purpose as we compare Scripture with Scripture, that discipline is always
for the purpose of restoration. Discipline is not, the purpose of discipline in the church
is not excommunication. It is restoration. You remember the wonderful 23rd Psalm? He
restoreth my soul. What is Galatians 6? He that are spiritual, restore such in one. Is
that not what the Bible says? And the purpose of church discipline this morning, as we
look here in the church in Corinth, is not excommunication, but restoration. And so as
we read this, and we understand the goal or the purpose of church discipline, it seems
as if this offender, this one that was guilty, according to 1 Corinthians chapter 5, that
was involved in this gross immoral sin, it appears that he repented. He repented. Although
he had repented, he had not yet been restored. And therein lies the conflict in Corinth.
See, it's as if, as you look here and begin to see what Paul is saying in verses 5 and
6, and even as we dig further into the text this morning, that there were some perhaps
within the church in Corinth that thought that there should be more severe punishment
that would be laid upon this offender, that there would be no opportunity for restoration,
etc., etc. And Paul is going to address this conflict. Listen, this is sufficient what
has happened. And see, here this morning, the reality is our God is interested in restoration.
Our God is interested in restoration. Let me be careful to say this this morning. It
is absolutely the truth that an offended, or an offender, can be restored, but may not
be restored to the same position. Because the position may have qualifications that
they no longer qualify for. Does that make sense to you this morning? The Bible lays
out very plainly qualifications for pastors and for deacons. Beyond that, our God gives
us not only truth in His Word, but He gives us the Holy Spirit to give us discernment
and understanding, and He gives us good sense. And the reality is that there are some times
that someone could offend in a particular area that they may not be able to work with
a certain group of people any longer. Does that make sense? They can be restored, but
they may not be able to have that same place of service. But the reality is that they must
be restored if they are repented. If they have repented, the goal of church discipline
is restoration, not excommunication. So there's this conflict that's here within the church,
and this conflict had to be addressed. Why? Because once again, the conflict within the
church is keeping the church from doing the will of God. The conflict within the church
has the church focused on something other than what they need to be focused on. They're
not concerned about the discipleship and the growth of the believers in the church. They're
not concerned about reaching their community with the gospel. No, why? Because there's
conflict within. And so the conflict in Corinth must be addressed. Number two in our notes
this morning, as we look at verses 7 through 10, we see Paul's counsel, Paul's counsel.
I'm thankful this morning that the Apostle Paul provided the church in Corinth with a
straightforward plan. I'm thankful this morning that God's Word is counsel for us, that we
go to the Bible to understand how we're to deal with matters and address and go forward
in life. We understand that our Bibles teach us that His name shall be called Wonderful
Counselor. Amen? And it goes on from there. There's not the only two names that are listed,
but I want you to think about the truth that our God gives us counsel. He's given us His
Word, and His Word is profitable. The reality is that as we begin to examine issues and
matters and we begin to face conflicts, that we must go to the Bible and seek the mind
of Christ to know the counsel that God would give us for moving forward, for doing the
will of God. It must not be that we sit back and we begin to, well, what are your thoughts?
What's your opinion? And how should we? No, no, we must make sure the Bible is the text
that we go to in order to determine the path forward. Notice this morning, Paul says in
verse number seven, so that contrary wise, you ought rather, here's the first point of
Paul's counsel, to forgive Him. To forgive Him. Now think about that. There were some,
it seems, as you look at the conflict there in Corinth, there were some that probably
sat back and said, I don't believe that He's sincere. I'm not going to forgive. He doesn't
deserve to be forgiven. I'm being a little fastidious this morning, but that's sometimes
how people talk. Is it not? You've lived life long enough. I'm not preaching the junior
church this morning. You understand how this thing works. And the reality is that we come
in and Paul says, hey, you ought to forgive Him. You ought to forgive Him. But then notice
he goes on from there. He says, and comfort Him. Well, I'm going to forgive Him, but I
can't forget. It doesn't mean I have to talk to Him anymore. It doesn't mean I have to
be nice to Him. I mean, God tells me I have to forgive Him. Comfort Him. Comfort Him.
We dealt with that in 2 Corinthians 1, that God comforts us. What do we say that it means?
It means that He comes alongside us to encourage us and to strengthen us. Comfort Him. Comfort
Him. That goes beyond sometimes what we have drawn a circle.
or a boundary, if you will, around us and say,
that's as far as I'm going.
He says, forgive him, comfort him.
And I want you to notice the end of verse number seven
because it's so important where the Apostle Paul
is trying to help us.
Obviously, God giving us the truth here this morning.
He's trying to help us, yes, to understand a situation
and circumstance in Corinth, but also to understand
how we would handle said matters in our own lives.
And here's what he says, to forgive him
and to comfort him in verse number seven,
lest, notice the end of the verse,
perhaps such in one should be swallowed up
with over much sorrow.
I want to ask you a question this morning.
I almost said if, but I'm going to say when.
Because it's not a matter of if, it's going to happen in life.
You're going to offend somebody.
You're going to be the one that's wrong.
And let me ask you this morning, do you want to be forgiven?
Do you want to be comforted?
Do you want to know that you've been restored?
And this morning Paul says, forgive him, comfort him.
But then he goes on, there's a third point that he makes
in verse number eight.
He says, wherefore I beseech you.
Now let me just pause there for a moment
because we understand that language.
The Apostle Paul had used that language
in other portions of Scripture.
One of the ones that's probably the most familiar to us
is Romans chapter number 12, when he says,
I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercy of God,
that you present your body as a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service,
and be not conformed to this world,
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind
that you may prove what is that good and perfect
and acceptable will of God.
And the reality is that we come to this,
and Paul says, I beseech you.
Literally, I'm begging you
that ye would, notice what it says,
confirm your love toward him.
So look at this three-step plan
that is provided to the church in Corinth
that serves for us this morning as a great example
of how we too are to forgive.
He says, forgive him.
Comfort him.
Confirm your love toward him.
Sometimes we may think that if we do step one,
we're really something.
I mean, we have forgiven them.
And it's kind of like, Peter, Lord,
how often shall we forgive them?
Until seven times?
Right?
Why did he say that?
The understanding that we have as we read some historical
and understand some of the cultural things
is that really the common thought
within the religious sect of people
was that if you were to forgive someone
like three or four times, that was really something.
Till seven?
I say not unto you till seven times,
but till 70 times seven.
Is that what the Bible says?
So you get your little notebook out,
and you keep track,
and they get to number 489,
and you're like, man, one more time,
and I don't have to forgive them anymore.
Can I tell you, if that's your approach,
you do not understand what Christ is saying.
You just keep forgiving.
And you keep forgiving.
Because you have been forgiven.
And every time you go to God,
today when you sin,
and you go to God, and you say,
God, I confess it.
It's not a matter of, God, if I did something wrong.
No, you know you did.
He is faithful and just to forgive us.
And so this idea where we might think
as Peter did, that man, I've forgiven him,
and I've done my duty.
No, Paul says forgive him, comfort him.
Confirm your love toward him.
This is an arena this morning
that I believe that many of us
in our Christian lives
have absolutely never even considered
that it would go that far.
Because when we get offended,
we act real carnal.
Can I just be honest this morning?
When we get offended, we act real carnal.
We do.
We get our feelings hurt.
And we get our little pity party going.
And we get our fences up.
But here the Bible says,
forgive him, comfort him.
And then it says that we're to confirm
your love toward him.
Man.
You say, Pastor, why are you believing the point?
Because we need to.
Because I think it's a truth that's been
glossed over for far too long
within the church
of what does forgiveness really look like.
I hear of evangelists that give
accounts of being in churches.
You, if you were here,
I think a time or two ago
when Brother Paul Mershon preached
from this pulpit for one of our fall revival meetings,
he actually shared the story,
the experience that he had
of being in a church that he was preaching
at a revival meeting.
And just a spirit amongst the church
where he just felt like there was no liberty,
that he felt like there was no freedom to preach.
And he begins to just really
just praying about this and laboring over this
and what's going on here
and why is there no liberty?
And he finds out that there's a fellow
that sits over here in this part of this church
and there's a fellow that sits over here
in this part of the church
and they had a falling out 15 years ago
and they've not been able to speak
one kind word to one another
and they're at enmity and at odds one with another
and everyone within the church knows it
and it's just going on and it's going on.
And listen, that's not how God
has told us to deal with things.
Forgive, comfort, confirm your love toward Him.
Now notice as we continue looking in here
in verse number nine the Bible says,
notice what Paul says,
for to this end also did I write
that I may know the proof of you
whether ye be obedient in all things.
Now this is an interesting verse of Scripture.
I mean Paul says here,
I'm writing this to you to understand
are you going to be obedient in all things?
You were obedient when it came to judgment.
Are you going to be obedient
when it comes to forgiveness and restoration?
Can I tell you that the most,
the common human being
is much more ready to deal with judgment
than they are to deal with forgiveness and restoration.
It takes a spiritual work
of the Holy Spirit of God
working in your heart and my heart
to forgive and restore.
Sometimes we're quick to judge.
Oh, Paul said judge, man, we're going to lay it on them.
Paul says forgive, comfort, confirm your love.
Are you going to be obedient in all things?
I'm writing this to you, he says,
for to this end also did I write
that I might know the proof of you,
whether ye be obedient in all things.
You were obedient in the judgment part.
And that's good.
But are you going to be obedient
in the forgiveness and restoration part?
Well, I just can't do it.
You just don't know how.
Can I tell you this morning that forgiveness
is a pillar of biblical Christianity?
It is a pillar of biblical Christianity.
Can I tell you this morning that what you can't do,
God can do through you?
Can I tell you this morning that God
has never given to His people
a command that He does not expect us
to be able to obey,
that He does not give us the power
and the ability to obey?
Notice with me a couple of verses of Scripture.
I told you we'd look at some.
Matthew 18, I referenced it just a moment ago.
But I want you to see it in your own Bible
so you don't think I'm just quoting something
and making something up here.
Notice what the Bible says.
This is right after the Lord Jesus Christ
deals with church discipline
in verses 15-20.
In verse 21,
then came Peter to Him and said,
Lord, how oft
shall my brother sin against me
and I forgive him?
Till seven times
Jesus saith unto him,
I say not unto thee until seven times,
but until seventy times seven.
Notice in Luke chapter 17.
Notice what the Bible says in Luke 17.
This is a passage of Scripture that we use.
is really several years ago, verse number five.
And as I preached on this, increase our faith,
we dealt with it in the very first Sunday
of that particular calendar year
of looking at the context of this whole passage
and where they say increase our faith.
But notice in verse number one of Luke 17,
then said he, this is Jesus speaking to the disciples,
it is impossible, but the defenses will come.
But woe unto him through whom they come,
it were better for him that a millstone
were hanged about his neck,
and he cast him to the sea,
then that he should offend one of these little ones.
Then he says this, take heed to yourselves.
If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him,
and if you repent, forgive him.
Verse number three, the teaching of Jesus
in a single verse of scripture is what's illustrated
in 2 Corinthians chapter number two.
If a brother offends you, rebuke him, that's what they did.
He was in gross immoral sin.
1 Corinthians five, go back and read it,
you'll see what's going on.
In 1 Corinthians chapter number five, Paul says,
judge, he deals with it, he was rebuked.
And it says, if he repent, and it seems as if
as you read the scriptures that this man repented,
then what is your duty, forgive him.
Paul lays it out to forgive, to comfort,
to confirm your love.
Notice he says in verse number four,
and if he trespass against thee seven times in a day.
Now just think about that for a moment.
I don't know how your day goes,
but for most of us, after about three or four times,
if the same person's offended you that day,
you're probably not gonna wanna be in this presence.
You know what I'm saying?
You're gonna wanna, like, I need to get away,
I need to get out of this situation, I can't.
He says, if thy brother, notice,
if he trespass against thee seven times in a day,
and seven times in a day, turn again to thee,
saying, I repent, thou shalt forgive him.
And notice what it says.
The apostles said unto the Lord, increase our faith.
What a great response to the teaching of Jesus
on forgiveness, increase my faith, help me.
Think about our theme for this year.
God's grace is sufficient.
If God's told us to forgive, to comfort,
and to confirm our love toward him,
as we find in 2 Corinthians chapter two,
verses six and seven, or verse seven and eight,
I would say to you this morning
that God's grace is sufficient,
that God will help you do what God has instructed us to do.
I reference Galatians 6, one,
ye that are spiritual, restore such in one.
I reference Ephesians four, in verse number 32,
where the Bible says, and be kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another,
even as God, for Christ's sake, hath forgiven you.
You know what really helps us to forgive one another?
Is when we remember that we've been forgiven.
You know when we don't want to forgive someone else?
When we're in the flesh,
and we're thinking about how we were hurt,
and how you don't know what they said,
you don't know what they did.
Do you know what you did to Christ?
Do you remember what Jesus said of the ones
that were beating him, mocking him,
putting him on that cross?
He said, Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they do.
What a great example for us this morning.
See, when I remember that I've been forgiven,
it goes a long way to me forgiving someone else.
And it doesn't end with just, well, I forgave him,
but man, it doesn't mean I have to be nice to him.
It doesn't mean I have to talk to him.
Check your heart, seriously.
I'm not saying that you should put yourself
in a position to continue to be taken advantage of,
and abused, and so on and so forth,
but the reality is that we've been given this instruction.
We must understand the entirety
of the counsel that is given.
Number three, as we go through the text of Scripture
and finish up this morning,
we saw the conflict in Corinth.
We noted the counsel that Paul gave,
and now I want you to see that Paul's concern
is given to us in verse 11.
Let me read verse 10.
To whom ye forgive anything, I forgive also.
For if I forgave anything, to whom I forgave it,
for your sakes forgave I it in the person of Christ.
And again, just following up on that truth of forgiving.
But then we come to verse number 11,
and it's in verse number 11
that Paul's concern is revealed to us.
See, the apostle Paul was aware of the reality
that we have an enemy.
We have an enemy.
And the apostle Paul understood that the enemy works
and the enemy seeks to get advantage of us.
In fact, it says in verse number 11,
lest Satan should get an advantage of us,
for we are not ignorant of his devices.
We understand this morning that we have this enemy.
Ephesians chapter six, if you would,
just turn there for a moment.
I want to read a few verses of Scripture to you
because the apostle Paul was keenly aware of this reality
that God's people are facing an enemy, an adversary,
a Satan that is the accuser of the brethren,
that is the one that wants to devour you.
Paul writes of this to the church in Ephesus
in Ephesians chapter six, beginning in verse number 10,
where Paul says, finally, my brethren,
be strong in the Lord and the power of his might.
Put on the whole armor of God
that you may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil.
Notice, for we wrestle not against flesh and blood,
but against principalities, against powers,
against the rulers of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickedness in high places.
How many of you have learned in your Christian life
that this battle, this war, it's a spiritual war?
I believe it was Tozer said it best,
the Christian life is better described as a battlefield,
not a playground, a battleground, not a playground.
And it's true, we are engaged in spiritual warfare.
He says in verse 13, wherefore,
take unto you the whole armor of God
that you may be able to withstand in the evil day,
and having done all to stand, stand therefore,
having your loins girt about with truth
and having on the breastplate of righteousness
and your feet shod with the preparation
of the gospel of peace above all,
taking the shield of faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked
and take the helmet of salvation
and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God.
Notice verse 18, praying always
with all prayer and supplication in the spirit
and watching thereunto with all perseverance
and supplication for all saints.
Listen, we need to put on the whole armor of God.
We need to be prayed up.
We see in verse 18, the importance of prayer.
Paul was aware of this.
In fact, Paul had experienced this
in 1 Thessalonians chapter two, in verse number 18,
the Bible says that Paul makes reference
to the fact that he had planned
to go to Thessalonica once and again,
but Satan hindered us, is what Paul says
in 1 Thessalonians two, in verse number 18.
It's Peter that stands there
in 1 Peter chapter number five and says,
be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary,
the devil is a roaring lion,
walketh about seeking whom he may devour,
whom resists steadfast in the faith.
Knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished
in your brethren that are in the world.
Listen, Satan wants to get an advantage of us.
Can I tell you this morning that the context
of 2 Corinthians chapter two
is speaking of the church corporately?
Can I just pause for a moment and tell you
that Satan wants to devour you individually?
He wants to destroy you.
He wants to devour you.
By the way, I'm about sick and tired of the enemy.
I'm serious.
I've had to deal with things that I can't say publicly
from people that are dealing with the attack of the enemy
that just makes me mad at the enemy,
because he's trying to destroy people.
I'm talking about some young people this morning.
He wants to devour you.
This is not a game.
It's not a game.
I shared some things with Joseph last week.
He said, why are you so worked up?
Because it's real.
It had nothing to do with Joseph, zero.
Zero.
But because of other things that were going on,
I went to my son.
I said, I want you to know, this is real.
It's not the first time I've ever had that conversation
with him, by the way.
He said, why are you so worked up?
Listen, we better get worked up
over what the enemy is doing to our young people.
It's about time that we recognize that we have an enemy,
and he's trying to destroy and devour.
Within the context of 2 Corinthians,
he wants to gain an advantage of the church.
He wants to destroy us as individuals.
He wants to destroy us as a community.
He wants to destroy us as a nation.
He wants to destroy us as individuals.
He wants to destroy us corporately, collectively.
He'd love nothing more
than if this church didn't sit on this hill anymore.
I'm being honest with you.
He'd love nothing more
than to destroy your life and your family and our church.
It's what the enemy wants to do.
And we can think of all of the quote-unquote big sins,
but when you think of all of those,
you can think about what's coming to them.
And we understand the truth of Ai, that there was sin in the camp.
We understand the truth that a little leavened, leavened the whole lump.
We understand those principles.
But can I tell you this morning that the subject that Paul's dealing with is forgiveness.
It's forgiveness, because when we don't forgive, you know what happens?
You get bitter.
You get bitter, you read Hebrews 13, God talks about bitterness.
I've said this for years.
Bitterness will destroy the vessel in which it is stored more than the vessel in which
it is poured.
Listen, this subject of forgiveness, Paul's not dealing with the same level of some of
the sin that we could talk about this morning that we think of, man this is, and I'm not
saying that those are things that we should pass over.
Those are important things to understand, but this morning he says listen, when I talk
about the subject of forgiveness and the importance of you church and Corinth forgiving and comforting
and confirming your love toward this one, I want you to understand that I'm concerned
why lest Satan should get an advantage of us, for we are not ignorant of his devices.
I'm so thankful this morning that God has exposed the tactics of our enemy.
We are not ignorant of his devices.
Can I tell you this morning that the enemy has no new tricks?
He really doesn't.
You study the scriptures, you can find a whole lot of the tactics of the enemy by reading
the scriptures.
You begin to find these tactics and you say this just is in a new era, but it's the same
old trick.
I mentioned this several weeks ago as we looked at the beginning of 2 Corinthians chapter
number 1, dealing with the comfort and the need for that encouragement, that one of
the tools that Satan often goes to in his toolbox is the tool of discouragement.
He wants to discourage people and get them in a place of not doing anything for the cause
of Christ because they're just discouraged and they're overwhelmed.
But can I tell you with the subject of forgiveness, Paul says as we look at this passage that
the failure to forgive will lead not only to bitterness but to more division.
And Paul wants to ensure us this morning and he wants to ensure these believers at Corinth
that our behavior must be proper, that our behavior, our approach to dealing with subjects
and matters must be biblical and we must not give place to the enemy.
Notice what the Bible says in Ephesians 4, we've referenced already verse 32 a couple
of times this morning, but I want to go earlier in the text of Scripture and in Ephesians
chapter number 4, in verses 26 and 27, again they are familiar verses of Scripture, it's
actually in this passage that he's dealing with the put off and put on principle that
we mentioned at the beginning of the service this morning.
We see it also referenced in the book of Colossians, but notice here in verse 26, the Bible says
be angry and sin not, let not the sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to
the devil.
You know there are things in this context in Ephesians chapter number 4, being angry
and he says be angry and sin not, but he says let not the sun go down upon your wrath, deal
with it.
You know what happens so often, we just let it kind of simmer.
You know what happens to a simmering pot?
It overflows.
You ever hear the expression, it's the hair or the straw that broke the camel's back.
You just let something simmer long enough and bother you and fester long enough, it's
going to come out eventually and most likely it's going to come out in a bad way.
It's going to be ugly, right?
And all of a sudden you're going to get historical about something that happened 14 years ago
and the person's going to be looking at you like what in the world?
And you're going to remember every single point, every single minute and all this stuff
and it's just going to be a mess.
He says let not the sun go down upon your wrath and then he says this, neither give
place to the devil.
Contextually dealing with anger, I would say that we can take and use this principle from
verse number 27 of giving place to the devil that we can give place, we can leave that
open opportunity for the devil to come in and attack and divide and cause all kinds
of problems and as we look at that truth and apply it to 2 Corinthians chapter number 2,
it's with the subject matter of not forgiving.
I don't want to give place to the devil.
Listen he is, you know what Michael said, the Lord rebuked thee.
You read the book of Jude, I think it's verse number 9, when he does bring a railing accusation
about the body of Moses, he said the Lord rebuked thee.
This morning we better learn to forgive.
I don't know what someone, what many someones may be dealing with but I know this morning
that 2 Corinthians, more so, I read this book a number of times in the last quarter
in preparation for our series of 2025.
I do that every year when I'm getting ready to do a new study, I just, I keep doing my
normal Bible reading but then I just read whatever book I'm going to preach to and I
just read it and re-read it and re-read it and re-read it and read it again and read
it again.
Can I tell you this morning, it's so much more applicable than what I realized even
in reading it over and over and over again in the last quarter of last year.
This is where we live, this is where we live, and the subject of forgiveness, it is a pillar
of biblical Christianity.
I said three weeks ago, we all need to be comforted because we deal with sorrow.
I said a couple of weeks ago, we all have been misunderstood at some point and we need
to learn how to deal with that.
We've all been offended and we need to learn how to deal with forgiveness, biblically deal
with forgiveness.
Let us pray.
Father, we love you.
We thank you for loving us.
God, I pray this morning that your Holy Spirit would have His will and way.
Possibly this morning there's someone here that is not saved.
They've never been forgiven of their sin by you.
Lord, I pray that today would be the day of their salvation, that they would recognize
for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God.
They'd recognize that you died for them, but God commendeth His love toward us and that
while we're yet sinners, Christ died for us.
They'd understand the gift of God, see the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God
is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
They'd understand that wonderful promise, for whosoever shall call upon the name of
the Lord shall be saved.
Or if there's someone this morning that needs to be saved and to be born again, I pray that
you would work and move and Lord, help us to have the opportunity to talk to them.
Or maybe there's some folks here this morning that are dealing with an unforgiving spirit
or they've been hurt and I'm not discounting that hurt, just simply saying that your grace
is greater.
And God, you've given us instruction for how to deal with that hurt and how to forgive
and comfort and confirm our love.
God, the purpose is restoration, not excommunication.
I pray, Father, that you'd help us to be biblical.
We say as Baptists that the Bible is our sole authority for faith and for practice.
This text this morning squarely addresses our practice.
How do we forgive?
We've been instructed to forgive.
And God, I pray that you'd help us to be biblical.
I pray that you'd work and move as only you can.
We'll thank you for it.
In Christ's name we pray.
We just ask.